---
title: " Using AGN light curves to map accretion disc temperature fluctuations"
collection: publications
category: agns
permalink: /publication/paper4
excerpt: 'The current understanding of AGN discs includes an X-ray "lamppost” that sits above the disc and variably illuminates it.  This variable illumination causes the disc to vary in UV/optical wavelengths.  Our recent work attempts to map the disc itself using a sample of multi-filter AGN lightcurves, and we find that many of our maps are inconsistent with a lamppost being the only source of variability.  Moreover, our maps are dominated by slow-moving fluctuations that are more consistent with being generated by the disc itself.  These findings could have huge impacts in how we understand AGN variability, as intrinsic disc fluctuations have been hypothesized and simulated yet never directly observed.'
date: 2022-06-01
venue: 'MNRAS'
---

We introduce a new model for understanding AGN continuum variability. We start from a Shakura-Sunyaev thin accretion disc with a steady-state radial temperature profile T(R) and assume that the variable flux is due to axisymmetric temperature perturbations δT(R, t). After linearizing the equations, we fit UV-optical AGN light curves to determine δT(R, t) for a sample of seven AGNs. We see a diversity of |δT/T| ~ 0.1 fluctuation patterns which are not dominated by outgoing waves travelling at the speed of light as expected for the 'lamppost' model used to interpret disc reverberation mapping studies. Rather, the most common pattern resembles slow (v ≪ c) ingoing waves. An explanation for our findings is that these ingoing waves trigger central temperature fluctuations that act as a lamppost, producing lower amplitude temperature fluctuations moving outwards at the speed of light. The light curves are dominated by the lamppost signal - even though the temperature fluctuations are dominated by other structures with similar variability time-scales - because the discs exponentially smooth the contributions from the slower moving (v ≪ c) fluctuations to the observed light curves. This leads to light curves that closely resemble the expectations for a lamppost model but with the slow variability time-scales of the ingoing waves. This also implies that longer time-scale variability signals will increasingly diverge from lamppost models because the smoothing of slower moving waves steadily decreases as their period or spatial wavelength increases. 
